# Constraining_the_AP_Effect_with_CNNs
This repository contains codes relevant for using convolutional neural netorks (CNNs) to constrain a proxy for the Alcock-Paczynski effect in simulated galaxy catalogs. Codes included can generate mock galaxy catalogs (through multiple methods), artificially stretch catalogs in a manner consistent with the AP effect, and construct/train a CNN to identify that stretch. Feel free to read my undergraduate senior thesis for some theoretical background on cosmology/neural networks relevant to this work as well as for preliminary results applying this work to Gaussian random fields.

The folder "Gaussian_Random_Field_Mocks" contains any work using mock galaxy catalogs generated from Gaussian random fields (GRFs) to train CNNs. "Norm_Gaussian_Field_test.ipynb" is a notebook that generates GRFs from a realistic matter power spectrum that has been artificially 'stretched' by some factor. The notebook also contains code for constructing a CNN with PyTorch and training that CNN on the stretched GRFs. The folder "Galaxy_Field_Modules_Test" contains a similar notebook for training a CNN from mock galaxy catalogs generated from stretched GRFs. The only difference is that in this notebook, I experiment with importing functions from .py files rather than defining all my functions within the notebook itself. I do this because many of the notebooks in this repository contain the same shared code, so in hindsight, it would have been more efficient to define that shared code in .py files and then import them into the many notebooks of this repository. The "Verification" notebooks are used to visualize the effectiveness of the trained CNNS in recognizing the factor by which fields have been stretched. Specifically, they plot the actual stretch of a field against the CNN's estimated stretch for 1000 different fields, and those plots are useful for seeing biases in trained CNNs.

The folder "HOD_Galaxy_Catalogs_from_Quijote_Halos" contains any work using galaxy catalogs generated from Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD) codes applied to dark matter halo simulations from the Quijote catalog. "Simon_Sancho_NN.ipynb" is a notebook in which I use existing galaxy catalogs from the Sancho Suite (data downloaded from Globus with a link on [this page](https://quijote-simulations.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sancho.html)) to train a CNN. The notebook contains a variety of options for the CNN architecture, optimizer, weight/bias intitialization, and learning rates. Many of these options, particularly how to initialize the weights/biases and their repsective learning rates within the CNN, are motivated by discussions with Simon Sundberg, who at the time of writing is an Ohio State University grad student under Prof. Richard Furnstahl.

Still inside the folder "HOD_Galaxy_Catalogs_from_Quijote_Halos", the notebook "Simon_Marginalized_NN.ipynb" trains a CNN on stretched galaxy fields generated from Quijote halos assuming a variety of HOD parameters. In a seperate code, I randomly pull HOD parameter values from a uniform distribution over a prior range specific to each parameter. Both "NFW_notebook-example.ipynb" and "SNAP_notebook-example.ipynb" are meant to use HOD to generate galaxy catalogs from Quijote halos, and both codes also allow for the customization of HOD parameter values. However, I have done more development on the NFW code to create a large number of galaxy catalogs that marginalize over HOD parameter values because it is much faster than the SNAP code. Effectively, when assigning the positions/velocities of satellite galaxies during catalog generation, the NFW code simply samples a NFW distribution for the position and a Gaussian distribution for the velocity of a satellite. The SNAP code instead uses snapshots of dark matter particles within a halo and assigns satellites to the positions/velocities of randomly selected particles within that halo. Using snapshots in this way is more computationally intensive than sampling distributions as is done in the NFW code.

Still within the folder "HOD_Galaxy_Catalogs_from_Quijote_Halos", the "config.py" is necessary for the notebooks "NFW_notebook-example.ipynb" and "SNAP_notebook-example.ipynb" to run. Additionally, the pyhod package used by those notebooks is located within the "HOD" folder, and the first few cells of those notebooks contain instructions on how to setup a virtual environment with the pyhod package.

Finally, "Power_Stretch_Demo.ipynb" is a notebook meant to visualize how stretching the matter power spectrum used to generate a GRF or galaxy field in turn stretches that GRF or galaxy field. "Omega_m_Stretch_Calc.ipynb" contains some calculations for the magnitude of the observed AP effect from assuming an incorrect value for $\Omega_m$ as well as from assuming an incorrect equation of state for dark energy.
